KEP for promoting AppArmor to GA (#1444)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-node/24-apparmor-ga/README.md

| 5) Using localhost profile with invalid name                                                       | Pod **not** created. | N/A                                                                                                                                                   |
| 6) AppArmor is disabled by the host or the build                                                   | Pod **not** created. | Kubelet puts Pod in blocked state.                                                                                                                    |

Scenario 2 is the expected behavior of using AppArmor and it is included here
for completeness.

Scenario 5 represents the case of failing the existing validation, which is
defined at [Pod API](#pod-api).

### Version Skew Strategy

Because the API is currently represented as (mutable) annotations, care must be
taken for migrating to the API fields. The cases to consider are Pod create and
update.

All API skew is resolved in the API server. New Kubelets will only use the
AppArmor values specified in the fields, and ignore the annotations.

#### Pod Creation

If no AppArmor annotations or fields are specified, no action is necessary.

> If the `AppArmor` feature is disabled per feature gate, then the annotations are
> cleared (current behavior) and the security context fields are being ignored.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the `AppArmor` feature is disabled per feature gate, then the annotations and fields are cleared (current behavior).
```

the relevant field.

#### Upgrade / Downgrade

Nodes do not currently support in-place upgrades, so pods will be recreated on
node upgrade and downgrade. No special handling or consideration is needed to
support this.

On the API server side, we've already taken version skew in HA clusters into
account. The same precautions make upgrade & downgrade handling a non-issue.

Since
[we support](https://kubernetes.io/docs/setup/release/version-skew-policy/) up
to 2 minor releases of version skew between the master and node, annotations
must continue to be supported and backfilled for at least 2 versions passed the
initial implementation. However, we can decide to extend support farther to
reduce breakage. If this feature is implemented in v1.20, I propose v1.24 as a
target for removal of the old behavior.

### Test Plan

AppArmor already has [e2e tests][https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/6596a14/test/e2e_node/apparmor_test.go],
but the tests are guarded by the `[Feature:AppArmor]` tag and not run in the
standard test suites.

Prior to being marked GA, the feature tag will be removed from the AppArmor
tests, and the tests will be migrated to the new fields API. Tests will be

> tagged as `[Feature:AppArmor]` like it is implemented right now.

Reviewer: These two sentences seem to contradict each other

Author: Oops, sorry. Fixed that one.

Kubernetes are observable, scalable and supportable, can be safely operated in
production environments, and can be disabled or rolled back in the event they
cause increased failures in production. See more in the PRR KEP at
https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-architecture/20190731-production-readiness-review-process.md

Production readiness review questionnaire must be completed for features in
v1.19 or later, but is non-blocking at this time. That is, approval is not
required in order to be in the release.

In some cases, the questions below should also have answers in `kep.yaml`. This
is to enable automation to verify the presence of the review, and reduce review
burden and latency.

The KEP must have a approver from the
[`prod-readiness-approvers`](http://git.k8s.io/enhancements/OWNERS_ALIASES)
team. Please reach out on the
[#prod-readiness](https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/CPNHUMN74) channel if
you need any help or guidance.

-->

### Feature enablement and rollback

_This section must be completed when targeting alpha to a release._

- **How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?**

>   The feature can be enabled/disabled by the `AppArmor` feature gate. This
>   behavior will not change when moving to GA.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The feature can be enabled/disabled by the `AppArmor` feature gate. This
  feature gate can be used to disable the feature until it reaches GA.
```

_NOTE: Seccomp was in a very similar state, but with some subtle differences.
Promoting Seccomp to GA will be covered by a [separate
KEP](/keps/sig-node/20190717-seccomp-ga.md)._

### Goals

- Declare AppArmor as GA
- Fully document and formally spec the feature support
- Add equivalent API fields to replace AppArmor annotations and provide a pod
  level field, which applies to all containers.
- Deprecate the AppArmor annotations

### Non-Goals

This KEP proposes the absolute minimum to get AppArmor to GA, therefore all
functional enhancements are out of scope, including:

- Defining any standard "Kubernetes branded" AppArmor profiles
- Formally specifying the AppArmor profile format in Kubernetes
- Providing mechanisms for loading profiles from outside of the node
- Changing the semantics around AppArmor support
- Windows support

## Proposal

AppArmor is not available on every Linux distribution. Beside this, container
runtimes have AppArmor as compile-time feature which may be disabled as well.
With the GA API we do not change the error handling and behave exactly the same
as the current error propagation paths.

### API

> The AppArmor API will be functionally equivalent to the current beta API. This

Author: Yep, added a note about that.

| 4) Using an unsupported runtime profile (i.e. `runtime/default-audit`).                            | Pod **not** created. | N/A                                                                                                                                                   |
| 5) Using localhost profile with invalid name                                                       | Pod **not** created. | N/A                                                                                                                                                   |
| 6) AppArmor is disabled by the host or the build                                                   | Pod **not** created. | Kubelet puts Pod in blocked state.                                                                                                                    |

Scenario 2 is the expected behavior of using AppArmor and it is included here
for completeness.

Scenario 5 represents the case of failing the existing validation, which is
defined at [Pod API](#pod-api).

### Version Skew Strategy

> Because the API is currently represented as (mutable) annotations, care must be

Author: Ah, yeah I removed that paragraph to avoid confusion.

taken for migrating to the API fields. The cases to consider are Pod create and
update.

All API skew is resolved in the API server. New Kubelets will only use the
AppArmor values specified in the fields, and ignore the annotations.

#### Pod Creation

If no AppArmor annotations or fields are specified, no action is necessary.

If the `AppArmor` feature is disabled per feature gate, then the annotations and
fields are cleared (current behavior).

> If _only_ AppArmor fields are specified, add the corresponding annotations. This

Author: Alright, this should cover all use cases:
```
If a Pod with a container specifies an AppArmor profile by field/annotation,
then the container will only apply the Pod level field/annotation if no none
are set on the container level.
```

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://github.com/kubernetes/website

## Summary

This is a proposal to upgrade the AppArmor annotation on pods to a dedicated
field, and graduate the feature to GA. This proposal aims to do the _bare
minimum_ to clean up the feature, without blocking future enhancements.

## Motivation

AppArmor support has been added with Kubernetes v1.4 and is already in beta.
Profiles have to be available on each node whereas the container runtime ensures
that the profile is loaded when specified at pod or PSP level. Profiles can be
specified per-container via the pod’s metadata annotation:

```
container.apparmor.security.beta.kubernetes.io/<container_name>: {unconfined,runtime/default,localhost/<profile>}
```

The feature has been more or less unchanged ever since. Also note that the
addition predates feature gates or our modern concept of feature lifecycle. So,
even though the annotations include `beta` in the key, this is entirely useable

> on any production GA cluster.

Reviewer: this isn't accurate, the annotations are guarded by a feature gate and the feature can be disabled

Author: Removed that section.

The main motivation behind this KEP is to promote the AppArmor feature to GA.

_NOTE: Seccomp was in a very similar state, but with some subtle differences.
Promoting Seccomp to GA will be covered by a [separate
KEP](/keps/sig-node/20190717-seccomp-ga.md)._

### Goals

> - Declare AppArmor as GA

Reviewer: Since it is currently beta and can be disabled via feature gate, a release in beta with the fields would make sense to me before promoting to GA.

Author: Okay, what do you think about this proposal @tallclair @pjbgf ?

Reviewer 2: I am just not sure whether is there much benefit on changing the API whilst keeping it in beta, considering this feature kept the same API "stable" in beta for a few years.
I feel that changing the API without calling it GA may send the message that we have doubts about this feature/API and more changes may come down the line.

Going down that route, would that start the count down for deprecating the previous syntax or would we support both syntaxes until the feature GAs?

- Fully document and formally spec the feature support

> - Add equivalent API fields to replace AppArmor annotations

Reviewer: This KEP goes beyond the annotation support in adding a pod-level profile field. Is that intentional?

Author: Changed the line to include the pod wide field. Let's continue the discussion about the intention in https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/1444#discussion_r503234404

### Non-Goals

This KEP proposes the absolute minimum to get AppArmor to GA, therefore all
functional enhancements are out of scope, including:

- Defining any standard "Kubernetes branded" AppArmor profiles
- Formally specifying the AppArmor profile format in Kubernetes
- Providing mechanisms for loading profiles from outside of the node
- Changing the semantics around AppArmor support
- Windows support

## Proposal

AppArmor is not available on every Linux distribution. Beside this, container
runtimes have AppArmor as compile-time feature which may be disabled as well.
With the GA API we do not change the error handling and behave exactly the same
as the current error propagation paths.

### API

The AppArmor API will be functionally equivalent to the current beta API. This
includes the Pod API, which specifies what profile the containers run with.
There are no changes planned to the current `PodSecurityPolicy` API as part of
this KEP.

#### Pod API

The Pod AppArmor API is generally immutable, except in `PodTemplates`.

```go
type PodSecurityContext struct {
    ...
    // The AppArmor options to use by the containers in this pod.
    // +optional

>     AppArmor  *AppArmorProfile

Reviewer: pod-level apparmor profile is new to this KEP... the annotation-based feature only allows specifying container-level, correct?

Author: Yes that's correct. My idea was to apply the same hierarchy like we have it right now for seccomp. Basically if a profile gets added to a sandbox, it automatically applies to all containers. Containers security context have a higher priority than on the pod level. Do you think this is implementable? We do not pass the profile on sandbox creation via the CRI, so it would be just a pod to container field copy.

Reviewer: I don't have enough context to know how tailored to a particular container AppArmor profiles typically are... is a pod-wide AppArmor profile likely to work with arbitrary injected sidecar containers?

Reviewer: On the other hand, someone might prefer an injected sidecar picking up the pod-wide default and failing over running unconfined? Not sure...

Author: > I don't have enough context to know how tailored to a particular container AppArmor profiles typically are... is a pod-wide AppArmor profile likely to work with arbitrary injected sidecar containers?

At least the runtime/default profile (originated from docker) can be used with a wide variety of applications. From my viewpoint having a pod-wide field would be beneficial.

Reviewer 2: I believe AppArmor's usage tend to be quite analogous to seccomp, although the former can be a lot more detailed, in both cases having profiles set at both Pod and Container levels would be quite useful, specially when considering multi-container pods.

For arbitrarily injected sidecars this becomes a bit of an interesting problem, as the pod level profile would need to account for its own workload plus an external workload that it would not know until deployment time. But on that case, the container-level profile override would resolve the issue, which is the same situation we have for seccomp.

Reviewer 3: Yeah, I suspect with both AppArmor & seccomp the usecase for a pod-level profile is something akin to the default profile, with fairly broad grants. Application-specific profiles, will likely need to be tied to the container. With seccomp, the pod-level field seems slightly more useful since the "runtime default" profile is not actually the default, but I also agree that the APIs should probably mirror each other.

    ...
}

type SecurityContext struct {
    ...
    // The AppArmor options to use by this container. If AppArmor options are
    // provided at both the pod & container level, the container options
    // override the pod options.
    // +optional
    AppArmor  *AppArmorProfile
    ...
}

// Only one profile source may be set.
// +union
type AppArmorProfile struct {
    // +unionDescriminator
    Type AppArmorProfileType

    // Load a profile defined on the node.
    // The profile must be available on the node to work.

>     // The length of the profile is limited to 253 characters.

Reviewer: is this stricter than the current annotation validation (I think it is)? if so, that means currently working annotations could not be copied into the field

Author: Is it about the profile length? That's the AppArmor limitation rather than any validation we do in Kubernetes. So I guess it's not stricter.

Reviewer: The question is what this API-level validation would do with existing deployment/replicasets/pods which have an annotation longer than 253 characters.

Current behavior:
- API operations are not blocked
- On nodes that don't support apparmor, those would run fine
- On nodes that do support apparmor, those would fail with a runtime error about the path being too long? (verify)

Proposed new behavior:
- translation between annotation and field in pod creation would fail on field validation?

Author: If a profile name has more than 253 characters, then it would not possible to load it at all in memory. This means a runtime will fail to look it up. I think we should not enforce this by the API…should I remove the comment?

Reviewer: > This means a runtime will fail to look it up. I think we should not enforce this by the API…should I remove the comment?

It can be helpful to describe, but should not be confused with an API-enforced field limit

Author: Alright, I removed it to avoid confusion. :+1:

>     // The `Type` in this struct has to be set to `AppArmorProfileLocalhost`.

Reviewer: nit, put external-facing values in API doc, so `Localhost`

Author: Fixed as suggested :+1:

`apparmor_parser`.

Note that changing profiles is not recommended and may cause containers to fail
on next restart, in the case of the new profile being more restrictive, invalid
or the file no longer available on the host.

Currently, users have no way to tell whether their physical profiles have been
deleted or modified. This KEP proposes no changes to the existing functionality.

The recommended approach for rolling out changes to AppArmor profiles is to
always create _new profiles_ instead of updating existing ones. Create and
deploy a new version of the existing Pod Template, changing the profile name to
the newly created profile. Redeploy, once working delete the former Pod
Template. This will avoid disruption on in-flight workloads.

The current behavior lacks features to facilitate the maintenance of AppArmor
profiles across the cluster. Two examples being: 1) the lack of profile
synchronization across nodes and 2) how difficult it can be to identify that
profiles have been changed on disk/memory, after pods started using it. However,
given its current "pseudo-GA" state, we don't want to change it with this KEP.
Out of tree enhancements like the

> [seccomp-operator](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/seccomp-operator) can

Author: Yes, we renamed the project to `security-profiles-operator`. I'll add a note that it might be used to sync profiles across nodes.

provide such enhanced functionality on top.

###### Profiles managed by the cluster admins

The current support relies on profiles being loaded on all cluster nodes
where the pods using them may be scheduled. It is also the cluster admin's
responsibility to ensure the profiles are correctly saved and synchronised

> across the all nodes.

Author: Yep, thanks! I add that.

| 5) Using localhost profile with invalid name                                                       | Pod **not** created. | N/A                                                                                                                                                   |
| 6) AppArmor is disabled by the host or the build                                                   | Pod **not** created. | Kubelet puts Pod in blocked state.                                                                                                                    |

Scenario 2 is the expected behavior of using AppArmor and it is included here
for completeness.

Scenario 5 represents the case of failing the existing validation, which is
defined at [Pod API](#pod-api).

### Version Skew Strategy

Because the API is currently represented as (mutable) annotations, care must be
taken for migrating to the API fields. The cases to consider are Pod create and
update.

All API skew is resolved in the API server. New Kubelets will only use the
AppArmor values specified in the fields, and ignore the annotations.

#### Pod Creation

If no AppArmor annotations or fields are specified, no action is necessary.

> 

Reviewer: Describe the behavior if the AppArmor feature (currently beta and enabled by default) is disabled. Currently the annotations are cleared. I would expect the new fields to behave the same as the annotations.

Author: Yes, I added this:
```
If the `AppArmor` feature is disabled per feature gate, then the annotations are
cleared (current behavior) and the security context fields are being ignored.
```

If _only_ AppArmor fields are specified, add the corresponding annotations. This
ensures that the fields are enforced even if the node version trails the API
version (see [Version Skew Strategy](##version-skew-strategy))

If _only_ AppArmor annotations are specified, copy the values into the

> corresponding fields. This ensures that existing applications continue to

Reviewer: an empty string annotation value or a `localhost/` annotation value is allowed (https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/deebe6619a1b4955b0cd109a8f05b1298a260310/pkg/security/apparmor/validate.go#L138-L142). what would happen with those?

Author: CRI-O and containerd:
- apply the runtime default profile if the name is empty
- strip the `localhost/` prefix

Reviewer: add descriptions of those edge cases and what field values we will translate those to (and make sure the impl PR tests those)

Author: Done, also added a note about the e2e tests.

enforce AppArmor, and prevents the kubelet from needing to resolve annotations &
fields.

If both AppArmor annotations _and_ fields are specified, the values MUST match.
This will be enforced in API validation.

To raise awareness of annotation usage (in case of old automation), a warning
mechanism will be used to highlight that support will be dropped in v1.24.
The mechanisms being considered are audit annotations, annotations on the
object, events, or a warning as described in [KEP
#1693](/keps/sig-api-machinery/1693-warnings).

#### PodSecurityPolicy Enforcement

The PodSecurityPolicy admission controller must continue to check the PSP object
for annotations, as well as for fields.

When setting default profiles, PSP only needs to set the field. The API

> machinery will handle setting the annotation as necessary.

Author: Fixed as suggested :+1:

When enforcing allowed profiles, the PSP should check BOTH the annotations &
fields. This is implicitly given because annotations as well as the new field
will be immutable.

#### Pod Update

The AppArmor fields on a pod are immutable, which also applies to the
[annotation](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/b46612a74224b0871a97dae819f5fb3a1763d0b9/pkg/apis/core/validation/validation.go#L177-L182).

Therefore, AppArmor annotation updates will be ignored. This maintains backwards
API compatibility (no tightening validation), and makes a small stabilizing

> change to behavior (new Kubelets will ignore the update).

Author: Yes, this section can be removed.

#### PodTemplates

PodTemplates (e.g. ReplaceSets, Deployments, StatefulSets, etc.) will be
ignored. The field/annotation resolution will happen on template instantiation.

To raise awareness of existing controllers using the AppArmor annotations that
need to be migrated, a warning mechanism will be used to highlight that support
will be dropped in v1.24.

The mechanisms being considered are audit annotations, annotations on the
object, events, or a warning as described in [KEP
#1693](/keps/sig-api-machinery/1693-warnings).

#### Runtime Profiles

The API Server will continue to reject annotations with runtime profiles
different than `runtime/default`, to maintain the existing behavior.

Violations would lead to the error message:

```
Invalid value: "runtime/profile-name": must be a valid AppArmor profile
```

#### Kubelet Backwards compatibility

The changes brought to the Kubelet by this KEP will ensure backwards
compatibility in a similar way the changes above define it at API Server level.
Therefore, the AppArmor profiles will be applied following the priority order:

1. Container-specific field.
2. Container-specific annotation.
3. Pod-wide field.

> 4. Pod-wide annotation.

Reviewer: copy/paste from seccomp? there is no pod-wide annotation

Author: Yes, removed that one.

the relevant field.

#### Upgrade / Downgrade

Nodes do not currently support in-place upgrades, so pods will be recreated on
node upgrade and downgrade. No special handling or consideration is needed to
support this.

On the API server side, we've already taken version skew in HA clusters into
account. The same precautions make upgrade & downgrade handling a non-issue.

Since
[we support](https://kubernetes.io/docs/setup/release/version-skew-policy/) up
to 2 minor releases of version skew between the master and node, annotations
must continue to be supported and backfilled for at least 2 versions passed the
initial implementation. However, we can decide to extend support farther to
reduce breakage. If this feature is implemented in v1.20, I propose v1.24 as a
target for removal of the old behavior.

### Test Plan

AppArmor already has [e2e tests][https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/6596a14/test/e2e_node/apparmor_test.go],
but the tests are guarded by the `[Feature:AppArmor]` tag and not run in the
standard test suites.

Prior to being marked GA, the feature tag will be removed from the AppArmor
tests, and the tests will be migrated to the new fields API. Tests will be

> tagged as `[LinuxOnly]`.

Author: I think we either could auto-skip those tests if a node does not support AppArmor or we leave them scoped to the feature. I think we should leave it as it is right now and scope them to `[Feature:AppArmor]`. Added a note about that.

cause increased failures in production. See more in the PRR KEP at
https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-architecture/20190731-production-readiness-review-process.md

Production readiness review questionnaire must be completed for features in
v1.19 or later, but is non-blocking at this time. That is, approval is not
required in order to be in the release.

In some cases, the questions below should also have answers in `kep.yaml`. This
is to enable automation to verify the presence of the review, and reduce review
burden and latency.

The KEP must have a approver from the
[`prod-readiness-approvers`](http://git.k8s.io/enhancements/OWNERS_ALIASES)
team. Please reach out on the
[#prod-readiness](https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/CPNHUMN74) channel if
you need any help or guidance.

-->

### Feature enablement and rollback

_This section must be completed when targeting alpha to a release._

- **How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?**

  This feature was implemented prior to the concept of feature gates. Meaning,
  it is already enabled in live clusters and cannot be disabled. This KEP is

>   simply "cleaning up" the API to make it GA.

Reviewer: is this accurate? disabling the AppArmor feature drops the annotations when creating a pod today - see https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/7705fa295c6470a3e9b34ddad4f5304ed8058d88/pkg/api/pod/util.go#L364-L370

Author: Ah yeah, looks like it was one of the first features…changed the paragraph to:
```
  The feature can be enabled/disabled by the `AppArmor` feature gate. This
  behavior will not change when moving to GA.
```

- **Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e. can we rollback
  the enablement)?**

  This feature (AppArmor) cannot be disabled, as it is currently in a "pseudo-GA"

>   state. However, the changes it brings are backwards compatible, and the API

Reviewer: I'm not sure this is accurate, see https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/7705fa295c6470a3e9b34ddad4f5304ed8058d88/pkg/api/pod/util.go#L364-L370

Author: Yes, that's clearly wrong. Fixed the paragraph.
